If one headline could summarize the mood
surrounding the cruise industry in 2008,
[music] it's this: Go buy the trip and
short the stock. The advice was
declarative. A year into the Great
Recession, it made sense. If ever there
was going to be a screaming deal on a
vacation, it'd be now. And if ever there
was a time to bet against companies
built around discretionary spending,
it'd be now. If anything, the advice was
a little late. Carnival Cruise [music]
Lines, the biggest in the industry, was
already trading at $16, roughly half of
where it was a year prior. While Royal
Caribbean, trading in the mid-30s in
2007, had fallen to a measly $7 a share.
But both could and would drop lower as
travel businesses reliant on 90 to 100%
occupancy rates to keep the lights on
just didn't engender much investor
confidence in the century's [music]
biggest economic downturn. For their
part, though, the cruise companies got
creative. Addressing what industry
publications euphemistically called a
challenging sales environment, they
slashed room rates, they offered $200
onboard credits, [music] and they
included two for one airfare to get
there. A sign of the times, Norwegian
Cruise Lines, the third of the
industry's big three, offered full
refunds to those who booked a trip but
could prove they had lost their job
before embarkation. Wobbling, the
aggressive maneuvering kept occupancy
rates high enough to keep the companies
upright. But doubts remained. Extreme
discounting and last-minute deals could
create difficult precedents should the
economy bounce back. Cruising and
leisure travel could take longer than
other industries to bounce back, too.
And then the big one. How would these
companies, emboldened by their past two
decades of success and growth but now
struggling to find customers of any
sort, fill the massive boats about to be
delivered and activated in the next
couple years? [music]
The industry's big three saw the moment
a bit differently. Certainly, recession
wasn't something they expected, and each
readily admitted that the global
downturn hard rocked their respective
boats. It was in the first line in
Carnival's annual report. It was the
theme of the first paragraph of Royal
Caribbean's. and it was responsible for
the reported losses at Norwegian.
But, while each recognized things were
rocky for the moment, they didn't share
the belief that the industry had run
headlong into an existential problem, or
that [music] they had outkicked their
own coverage. Rather, they saw
revolution on the horizon.
Royal Caribbean pointed to its brand new
class of ships that they were betting
their future on. Carnival had its own
promising new boats on order, and
Norwegian had just revamped its fleet to
reflect an overhaul in its cruising
style. If they could get through the
downturn, they figured that the future
of cruising, which [music] they
themselves were introducing, was bright.
They had reason to project confidence.
[music]
Until this point, the past two decades
for the maturing industry had been red
hot. Since 1990, total passengers had
tripled, really hitting its stride in
the 2000s. And as the Cruise Line
International Association's 2009 slide
deck acknowledged, even when obstacles
arose, the graph still went up and to
the right. What this graph, with its
[music] upward trajectory and
recognition of passenger resilience
showed, was that the industry in the
last two decades had zeroed in on its
principal advantages.
>> [music]
>> For a majority American customer base,
cruising was the cheapest, most
hassle-free means of taking a vacation.
Compared to researching a place, finding
a hotel, booking airfare, then ground
transportation, figuring out dinner
every night, one could [music] just call
a travel agent, put down a credit card
for a single flat fee, and go on a trip,
even leave the country, without having
to do as much as renew a passport. A
cruise, with package airfare, meals
accounted for, destinations vetted, and
excursions already configured, offered
both the budget-focused and travel-weary
a way to get out to good weather, or to
see a corner of the world in a more
comfortable way. Customers said as much.
As these 2008 figures showed, multiple
stops were important, but so too was the
value, and especially the ease of it
all, which surveyed as far more
important to cruise vacationers than
non-cruise vacationers. The problem was,
this strategy [music] had a cap.
Leaning into easy and convenient,
cruises had established a reputation.
They were for the newly wed and nearly
dead. They lacked sophistication. They
weren't cool, [music] and especially for
kids, they were just out and out boring.
But with their mid-recession era fleet
expansion, Royal Caribbean was confident
that it may have just bucked the trend,
that it may have come across a concept
to making cruising [music] cool. Their
answer was this boat. When it launched
in 2009, Oasis of the Seas was the
largest passenger ship ever. But what's
more important than sheer size was what
it fit [music] inside. The ship was
split into seven distinct zones that
Royal Caribbean called neighborhoods.
The youth zone programmed crayon classes
for little ones to teen-only events for
older kids. Entertainment Place hosted
music and housed nightclubs. The pool
and sports zone hosted everything from
basketball courts to zip lines. The
Vitality at Sea Spa provided 29
treatment rooms and relaxation options.
While Central Park, the Boardwalk, and
the Royal Promenade collectively pulled
together a simulation of a streetscape.
The ship, by design, had something for
everyone, or more accurately, some
things for everyone. Rather than just
drinking and eating and reading a book
under the sun, every member of a
three-generation family had a place on
the boat that drew them in. The concept
changed the trajectory of cruising. Two
press releases from Royal Caribbean best
encapsulate the industry's pivot. First,
the announcement that the boat was on
its way from Finland to Florida. [music]
The release gets to the boat's many
features early and then never leaves the
subject. While it mentions how one can
book a trip on the boat, there's never
any mention as to where the boat is
actually bound to sail. As for the
announcement as to where the new pride
of the Royal Caribbean was to visit in
its first year of operation, well, that
too is opened with a paragraph on
amenities before getting to the part
that's been overlooked, that the boat
actually goes places. Of course, the
principal culprit in this destination
overlooking had been Royal Caribbean
themselves. A tacit recognition that the
business strategy was changing. The boat
itself was becoming the destination.
The destination-ification of the boat
addressed another major challenge
servicing the industry. In 2008, Royal
Caribbean quietly altered this Northeast
itinerary serviced by the Explorer of
the Seas. It would cut stops [music] in
Charlottetown, Sydney, and Quebec City.
The trip would still last 9 days, it
make up for the cuts with new domestic
stops, but it wouldn't quite offer the
same Eastern Canadian experience. It
wasn't due to a lack of interest. It
certainly wasn't due to the communities
not wanting the business or the
travelers not wanting to stop. It was
down to Royal Caribbean not wanting to
burn the fuel. In this industry, fuel is
measured not in gallons or liters, but
in metric tons. And in recent years,
fuel cost has accounted for about 10%
[music]
of total operating expenses at Royal
Caribbean, nearly matching the cost of
payroll. Even though some companies will
use hedging strategies to lock in future
fuel at a given rate, the industry is
uniquely vulnerable to fuel price
variability, and it was no different in
2008 when the cost of crude more than
doubled in the course of a year. The
short-term fix, given that 60% of all
fuel used on a cruise goes towards
physical propulsion, was to cut stops,
shorten routings, and slow the boats, or
just add fuel surcharges. Neither goes
over particularly well with the
clientele. As a customer at the time
pointed out, [music] for those that are
invested in the destination itself, such
changes in itineraries basically ruin an
entire trip. But the long-term solution
to better adjust for things they
couldn't control was to focus on what
they could. For Royal Caribbean and the
rest, it was to alter the emphasis on
the cruise experience. Make the trip
about what they could guarantee, the
boat and the experience it provides,
rather than the stops the boat makes or
doesn't.
In the decade that followed, the
innovation of strategy compelled
innovation in design. Spearheaded by
Royal Caribbean and the launch of the
Oasis of the Seas, the industry entered
a big boat bonanza. [music]
Royal Caribbean's fleet boomed from this
to this, adding an entirely new class of
ships while doubling its offering in the
Oasis class with two new additions. From
'09 to '19, both Norwegian and Carnival
added two new classes of their own and
seven new boats each. Justifying the
expansion of each was the increased
investment into each brand's developing
niche. Carnival was, as they put it,
fun. They were the easiest as a family,
running itineraries out of accessible
and drivable ports. They were affordable
and unpretentious. Norwegian, with an
emphasis on its freestyle concept,
essentially dining, recreating, doing
anything really on your own schedule,
was sleek and comparatively refined,
welcoming to young professionals,
adults, couples. While Royal Caribbean,
as they put it, was increasingly amped,
stuffing their ships with as many
groundbreaking firsts as they could
possibly imagine. There was something
for everyone in the family, but it cost
a bit more. All maintained their brand
messaging and values through their ever
bigger boats.
Bigger boats didn't sink the industry
like some had feared, they broke the
industry into a new [music] strata. 18
million global passengers in 2009
reached nearly 30 million by 2019.
>> [music]
>> And more than ever, the diversity of the
destination of these guests had
flattened out, with over a third
choosing the Caribbean. For Royal
Caribbean, annual itineraries used to
look like this. A lot of West Coast
options, a lot of East [music] Coast
ports of departure, a lot of variety. By
2019, it looked like this. A lot of
Caribbean with a lot of the Caribbean
cruises being serviced from US ports
near and near to [music] the Caribbean.
By 2024, it looked like this. Even more
Caribbean and a new wrinkle, shorter
average trips. Some of this is explained
by simple physical limitations. Cruising
in Alaska or Canada or Europe is only
feasible during the summer, while the
Caribbean is year-round. Or the fact
that Oasis class boats carrying the most
customers just can't access ports like
Baltimore's because they're too big to
clear under the Chesapeake Bay Bridge
safely. It's also recognition that
diversity of destination is also just
less central to the considerations of
the traveler as the boats themselves
have become a more central attraction.
And this, in turn, helps the company.
First, the fuel savings. [music] Simply,
the distance is fractional for Caribbean
routing than a California to Mexico
routing, which not only saves mileage,
but if it's a cruise drawn out across 7
days, the boat can go slower.
Then there's the fact that Royal
Caribbean has its own private resource
within the islands, [music] as does
Carnival, as does Norwegian. Now, rather
than passengers spending money in port
of call communities, that money's being
spent in their extended experience.
Beyond the company islands and the
comparative fuel savings, there's also
the image work. Because its itineraries
are plotting and pretty limited, it can
present fuel savings as a win in the
ever contentious environmental impact
assessment of these boats, that they're
being more fuel efficient than ever. By
rightly maneuvering to adjust for
consumer taste, big cruise has a won,
and they've kept winning. Through a
global pandemic that, again, certainly
seemed like the end of the industry, the
boats have only gotten bigger, and
cruising, now offering shorter and
shorter routings for PTO-crunched
millennials, has only gotten more
mainstream. But the industry is
innovating again. This time, not through
extreme size, but increasingly extreme
experiences.
There's a prevailing thought shared
across the industry that no cruise
company is competing with or even
thinking about the other cruise
companies. They're competing with a
land-based travel. So now, land-based
travel is fighting back. You won't find
Ritz-Carlton referring to its growing
fleet of commercial superyachts as
cruise ships.
>> [music]
>> In an industry where 1,000 guests
qualifies a ship as small or boutique,
the Ritz's first passenger ship, the
Evrima, holds only 298 guests. Perhaps
not a cruise ship, the Evrima does
commercially cruise, booking out [music]
7-day itineraries on plotting
Mediterranean routes in the summer and
Caribbean routes in the winter. And the
offering is meant to fill a niche within
the industry. It was positioned to fill
the ultra-luxury cruising void with a
purpose-built boat that blended elements
of cruises and super yachts. Providing
the requisite confidence to invest
[music] in a $300 million project like
this was the fact that cruising is
pretty in line with the company's core
competencies. The Ritz relies on loyalty
in the luxury hotel sector. Whether in
Aspen or New York, all their properties
have a similar warm yet refined look and
feel. They have staff trained to
remember names and to go [music] the
extra mile to help a guest. They have
restaurants run by empowered and
long-serving chefs. All these are things
that keep customers coming back even
strong customers to visit far-flung
vacation destinations because they have
so much faith in the hotel. All these
aspects are easily transferable over to
a super yacht. The boat, with its ample
exposed wood grain, looks like a Ritz
while the dining experience was designed
by the head chef at the Ritz-Carlton in
Wolfsburg. As for customer service, it's
the same as the hotels, too. Staff smile
and make eye contact with passing guests
[music] at 10 ft and greet them at 5
just like they're trained to do on land.
They're also empowered to spend up to
$2,000 to resolve an issue that a guest
runs into without management
green-lighting it. On water, the Ritz
believed it could provide what it does
on land and its customers trusted it as
much. In the first year of service, the
Evrima welcomed guests that half the
time had never ever taken a cruise
before.
>> [music]
>> While the Ritz-Carlton may have been the
first, the rest are coming. The first of
the Four Seasons and Orient Expresses
respective forays into the space are set
to hit the water in 2026, while Aman's
will hit the water in 2027.
Leaning into loyalty and brand trust is
not a strategy reserved just for the
ultra luxury yacht. Disney has taken a
similar approach with their own niche. A
relatively small player in the industry
beginning in the early 2000s, Disney,
too, saw opportunity in pivoting to a
more exciting and experiential cruising
model toward the end of the decade. With
new ships on the water in the early
2010s and new ships on order by
mid-decade, the company invested in the
sector with confidence because
leadership saw it as an intuitive
extension of the brand and its services
rather than an expansion into a a space.
It's reflected in corporate structure.
Rather than a component that's
outsourced or siloed, Disney Cruises
exists within Disney Experiences, the
same division that runs the famed parks.
All this means that the cruise line is
designed by, led by, informed by
strategy and best practices honed from
running parks and hotels since the
1950s. Similar to Ritz-Carlton, they
stay busy and bring back repeat
customers because they employ what works
on land. The thematic style of the boats
works for kids, costume staff members
charm parents by accommodating food
allergies and replacing a dropped ice
cream. The entertainment, from shows to
rides, broadly works for just about
everyone, regardless of generation.
While the company intersperses some
pretty unique itineraries within its
heavy dosing of Caribbean routings that
usually pass through Disney's Castaway
or Lookout Keys, it's most often the
on-boat experience that guests talk
about. Up to a 2.2% market share,
Disney's introduced a new boat in 2025,
expecting another in 2026, and another
in 2027, all of which from their largest
line, the Wish class. All major
investments, but investments justified
by a confidence that it can deliver at
sea what it does on land. Disney Cruises
is growing fast, but in an industry
that's not seeming to slow, it's not
setting the pace, it's just keeping up
with the rest. In a conversation with
Royal Caribbean leadership reflecting on
strategy during the Great Recession,
company leadership expressed one regret,
that they slowed future ship orders for
the following decade to quietly hedge
for some slowdown. When cruising bounced
back remarkably fast, when their new
boats are ready delivered were leading
the way, they were momentarily behind
again. It was a lesson that they and the
rest carried into COVID. The industry
would obviously slow, but not forever,
and they'd be ready when travel
returned.
Perhaps counterintuitively, what the big
boat bonanza of the last two decades
reflects is an industry increasingly
aware of its own advantageous
flexibility. With foundational cost and
convenience advantage, cruising simply
outcompetes the rest of the vacation
sector in its nimbleness. A hotel can
renovate, certainly, but a cruise can
reinvent its ship from the ground up.
And more importantly, a ship moves. If
fuel prices are up, a ship can move
less. If a destination grows dull or too
expensive or politically unstable, an
itinerary can simply change. If consumer
preference asks for shorter routing so a
younger clientele can save some PTO, the
cruise industry can accommodate. While
the reputation of a lack of
sophistication may linger, a sense that
cruises can be boring or weird or
sketchy still exists, the industry
doesn't just persist, it thrives. 50
separate new builds are set to hit the
water from 2026 to 2030. Some big enough
for 5 to 6,000 guests, and about half
with 1,000 plus guest occupancies. The
race for more and bigger boats just
won't stop.
If learning and gathering a better
understanding of how things work is your
thing, I suspect it is if you made it to
this point in the video, then this video
sponsor, Brilliant, is for you.
Brilliant is an online learning platform
that helps you grasp complex concepts in
physics, coding, math, or data analysis
through learning [music] by doing. If
for instance, you'd want to better
understand how companies of such scale
as cruise lines make decisions on
routing or pricing, Brilliant's data
analysis pathway would be an awesome
place to start. [music] And there's no
knowledge barrier to entry. The service
works for everyone from 10 years old to
100 years old and is designed to meet
you where you are. Once you're in, it's
a service that feels more fun and
rewarding than a hassle because the
modules are fast-paced, appropriately
challenging, and even competitive.
Something to give your mind a bit of a
jolt in the midst of a busy day. And
consider the alternative. Rather than
taking a few minutes to mindlessly
scroll, you can hop on Brilliant and
invest that little bit of time in
feeding your curiosity and feel all the
better for it. It's a smooth interface,
it's a well-thought-out and dynamic
product, and it will scratch an itch to
be generally more knowledgeable or hone
your problem-solving. If you're at all
curious, now is the time to check it out
as Brilliant is offering a 30-day free
trial. Go give it a shot by following
the link in the description,
brilliant.org/wendover, where you can
access it all for an entire month,
though I'm confident you'll stick around
longer.